The cGP research programme
===========================================================================

Our view is that a deep understanding of the genotype-phenotype map for a 
given complex morphological, physiological or behavioural trait *P* 
requires mimicking the *{GxE} â†’ {P}* map with mathematical 
genotype-to-phenotype descriptions that are capable of actually 
explaining the statistically identified relation between observed genetic 
(and environmental) variation and the resulting phenotypic variation in 
mechanistic terms. This goes beyond typical genotype-phenotype 
simulations to identify QTLs in quantitative genetics. Rather than 
defining the heritable unit by its statistical effect in an abstract 
model, we start out from a dynamic system of genes and gene effects, 
deriving explicitly defined phenotypes as emergent properties of a 
biologically interpretable dynamic system, rather than attributes of an 
isolated genetic model. We use the term :term:`causally cohesive 
genotype-phenotype model`s for models describing how :doi:`genetic 
variation manifests in phenotypic variation at various systemic levels 
<Rajasingh>` up to the tissue, organ and whole-organism level. The 
articulated relationship to the individual's genotype is the 
distinguishing feature of cGP models versus the broader class of 
mathematical models describing how complex biological phenotypes arise 
from the interactions of lower-level systemic entities. This is in stark 
contrast to standard population genetic models where phenotypic values 
are assigned directly to genotypes without involving any intermediate 
processes.

By establishing 
:ref:`cGP models in a population context <framework-figure>`, we 
are able to address a whole range of complex trait phenomena such as 
genetic dominance, epistasis, penetrance, expressivity, pleiotropy, 
canalization and genotype x environment interactions for a whole range of 
population contexts in ways that are beyond reach of classical 
statistical approaches (5-10).

.. todo::

   Refs. 5Rajasingh, H et al. (2008). Genetics 179, 1113.; 6Gjuvsland, AB et 
   al. (2007). BMC Syst Biol 1, 32.; 7Gjuvsland, AB et al. (2007). Genetics 
   175 (1), 411.; 8Gjuvsland, AB et al. (2007). BMC Syst Biol 1, 57.; 
   9Omholt, SW, in Biology of Dominance, (Landes Bioscience, Georgetown, TX, 
   2006).; 10Omholt, SW et al. (2000). Genetics 155 (2), 969.;

Our research on linking gene regulatory 
networks with quantitative genetics has been recognized as an important 
contribution to the current efforts to reconcile quantitative genetics 
theory with systems biology and has been cited in review/perspective 
papers on this matter in Science11, Nature12 and Nature Reviews Genetics13.

.. todo::

   Refs. 11Benfey, PN et al. (2008). Science 320 (5875), 495.; 12Rockman, MV 
   (2008). Nature 456 (7223), 738.; 13Phillips, PC (2008). Nat Rev Genet 9 
   (11), 855.;

In accordance with the VPH vision, realistic mathematical descriptions of 
complex phenotypes of biomedical importance at the organ level or at the 
individual level will have to encompass a hierarchy of descriptions at 
different length and time scales. Functional genetic variation normally 
leaves several structural as well as temporal phenotypic signatures at 
various systemic levels (such as mRNA, proteins, metabolites, tissue, 
organ, whole phenotype). The detection of this variation, and a deep 
understanding of the covariation patterns of the various signatures in 
relation to prior knowledge, is crucial for a whole range of epistemic 
and instrumental purposes.